If you've ever heard of RxJS,
it was probably in the context of Angular.
But RxJS is actually a free standing library for managing
asynchronous data flows that uses
the observer design pattern to help you keep track of all your data.
If you haven't heard of the observer design pattern,
I'll explain it at a super high level now and add some links in the resources.
In the observer pattern,
you create an object that does things,
and that object can have a list of observers,
or you might think of them as social media followers.
If the observed object performs an action or changes state in any way,
it can give its followers an update and they're notified that a change happened.
This pattern can be very helpful when working with asynchronous logic.
RxJS combines the observer pattern, functional programming concepts,
and the iterator pattern to create a smooth and fast data management system.
It's especially awesome if you're working with
web sockets or streams of live information.
The feature of RxJS you're most likely to hear about are observables.
So let's talk through an example from the RxJS docs to see if
the JavaScript we've learned so far in the course can help us make sense of this library.
First off, you can see that we have an observable saved into a
constant that is an instance of the RxJS observable,
which is a special entity in RxJS.
Observables are a little bit like functions,
except that where a function happens once and then returns,
an observable will be over a period of time and can return a stream of information.
So let's see how that works.
If I run this code,
I get the message just before subscribe,
which is this first console log.
Then I start getting value 1, 2,
3, which is this logic here,
which I caused to run by calling subscribe on my observable.
Observables can have a next,
an error, and a complete.
The error and complete can only happen once,
but the next is like the return of a function,
except that because observables happen over time,
next can happen multiple times throughout runtime.
Here you can see that we're calling next with 1, 2,
and 3, which are the values we get here when we console log them.
But we also have this setTimeout.
The setTimeout waits for one second before sending the last next return and the complete.
So what happens?
We get the message just after describe.
This means that while the program was waiting for this one second,
it moved on to the next console log before
coming back to get the value 4 and the message done.
Hopefully this gives you a better picture of what observables are and how they work.
RxJS is most commonly used in Angular.
So if that's your JavaScript framework of choice,
I would highly recommend learning this in more depth.
But RxJS can also be integrated with react and view,
and it's growing in popularity,
so we might be seeing a lot more of it in the future.
In the next section, you'll find some next steps for learning RxJS.